# Articles

1. [Debugging Rails Applications](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/debugging_rails_applications.html)
2. [Mastering Rails Logger - Tips for Effective Debugging](https://signoz.io/guides/rails-logger/#4-formatting-issues-in-logs)
3. [Supercharge your Rails logs with tags](https://thoughtbot.com/blog/supercharge-your-rails-logs-with-tags)
4. [Active Support Tagged Logging](https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveSupport/TaggedLogging.html)

# Questions

1. В чем разница между лог левелами

# Topics

1. Logger
2. **Rails**.logger.level - [debug: 0, info: 1, warn: 2, error: 3, fatal: 4, unknown: 5]
3. verbose logs
4. Tagged Logging
5. Performance
6. Customizing Log Format
7. Log file rotation

# Methods

1. debug
2. to_yaml
3. simple_format
4. verbose_query_logs
5. ActiveSupport::Logger
6. ActiveRecord::QueryLogs
7. ActiveSupport::TaggedLogging
8. debug

# Raw Info

Using the :debug level will have a greater performance penalty than :fatal, as a far greater number of strings are being evaluated and written to the log output (e.g. disk).

Another potential pitfall is too many calls to Logger in your code:

## [Debugging with the `debug` Gem](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/debugging_rails_applications.html#debugging-with-the-debug-gem)

The debugger can also help you if you want to learn about the Rails source code but don't know where to start. Just debug any request to your application and use this guide to learn how to move from the code you have written into the underlying Rails code.

Rails 7 includes the debug gem in the Gemfile of new applications generated by CRuby. By default, it is ready in the development and test environments. Please check its documentation for usage.

## Rails Logger

Rails Logger is the default logging system built into Ruby on Rails, designed to help developers track and understand the behaviour of their applications. It captures essential runtime information, including system events, errors, warnings, and custom log messages, providing valuable insights into the application’s operations.

## Purpose of Rails Logger

The primary purpose of Rails Logger is to aid in debugging and monitoring. By recording significant events and data points, Rails Logger allows developers to:

## How Rails Logger Works

Rails Logger works by writing log messages to a log file, which is typically stored in the log directory of your Rails application. These log files can be segmented by environment, such as development.log, test.log, and production.log

## Setting Log Level

The log level determines the severity of the messages that will be logged. Rails supports the following log levels:

- `:debug` - Detailed information, typically of interest only when diagnosing problems.
- `:info` - General information about system operation.
- `:warn` - Potentially harmful situations.
- `:error` - Error events that might still allow the application to continue running.
- `:fatal` - Very severe error events that will presumably lead the application to abort.

## Customizing Log Format

The default log format in Rails is simple and readable, but you can customize it to include additional information or match a specific format required by your monitoring tools.

Here's an example of customizing the log format in an initializer, `config/initializers/logger.rb`:

```ruby
class CustomLoggerFormatter < Logger::Formatter
  def call(severity, time, progname, msg)
    "#{time.to_s(:db)} #{severity} #{msg}\n"
  end
end

Rails.logger = Logger.new(STDOUT)
Rails.logger.formatter = CustomLoggerFormatter.new
```

Working: The call method in the CustomLoggerFormatter class is invoked internally by the Logger class whenever a log message is processed. Here’s a breakdown of how it works:

## Rotating Log Files

Log file rotation helps manage log file sizes by periodically renaming and compressing old log files. This is particularly important in production environments to prevent log files from consuming excessive disk space.

Rails supports log rotation out of the box. You can configure it in an initializer, for example, `config/initializers/logger.rb`:

```ruby
config.logger = Logger.new('log/production.log', 10, 100.megabytes)
```

### Logging with Different Severity Levels

Rails Logger supports several severity levels, which help categorize log messages by their importance. The severity levels, in order from least to most critical, are:

- `debug`: Detailed information, typically useful only when diagnosing problems.
- `info`: General information about the system’s operation.
- `warn`: Potentially harmful situations that should be noted.
- `error`: Error events that might still allow the application to continue running.
- `fatal`: Very severe error events that will likely lead the application to abort.
- `unknown`: An unknown message that doesn’t fit any other severity level.

## Advanced Configuration of Rails Logger

1. Custom Loggers
2. Tagging Logs
3. Lograge for improved Logging
4. Asynchronous Logging

## Effective Debugging Strategies Using Rails Logger

To make the most of Rails Logger for debugging, follow these strategies:

1. Identify key events: Log important milestones in your application's workflow.
2. Use conditional logging: Implement logic to log only under specific conditions.
3. Create context-rich messages: Include relevant data in your log messages for easier troubleshooting.
4. Leverage log levels: Use appropriate log levels to manage information density.

Here's an example of implementing these strategies:

```ruby
class OrdersController < ApplicationController
  def create
    @order = Order.new(order_params)

    Rails.logger.info("Creating order for user: #{current_user.id}")

    if @order.save
      Rails.logger.info("Order #{@order.id} created successfully")
      redirect_to @order, notice: 'Order was successfully created.'
    else
      Rails.logger.warn("Order creation failed: #{@order.errors.full_messages}")
      render :new
    end
  end
end

```

This example logs the user ID when creating an order, success messages with the order ID, and detailed error messages if the order creation fails.

## Best Practices for Rails Logging

To ensure your logging is both effective and secure, follow these best practices:

1. Avoid sensitive data: Never log passwords, credit card numbers, or other sensitive information.
2. Use structured logging: Implement JSON-formatted logs for machine-readable outputs.
3. Log in background jobs: Include logging in Sidekiq or ActiveJob processes.
4. Optimize performance: Be mindful of the performance impact of excessive logging.

## Logging Best Practices for Different Rails Components

### Logging in Models

Models in Rails encapsulate business logic and data persistence. Logging in models helps track important operations such as data changes, validations, and callbacks.

Best Practices:

- Event Logging: Log model events like creation, updates, and deletions to track changes in the database.

```ruby
class Post < ApplicationRecord
  after_create { Rails.logger.info "New post created: #{self.title}" }
  after_update { Rails.logger.info "Post updated: #{self.title}" }
  after_destroy { Rails.logger.info "Post deleted: #{self.title}" }
end
```

- Error Handling: Use logging to capture and report errors encountered during database operations or validations.

```ruby
class User < ApplicationRecord
  validate :check_age

  def check_age
    errors.add(:age, 'must be greater than 18') if age <= 18
    Rails.logger.error "Age validation failed for user #{self.id}: #{errors.full_messages}" if errors.any?
  end
end
```

## Tags

Rails has [a solution](https://api.rubyonrails.org/classes/ActiveSupport/TaggedLogging.html) for this issue. It allows you to prefix log messages with a tag, making it easier to filter logs to only those you care about right now. Here’s how it works:

```rb
Rails.logger.tagged("tag") do
  Rails.logger.info("message")
end
```

If you’re just getting started learning about a complex new app or system, you can wrap the entrypoint in `Rails.logger.tagged` to get a better idea of type types of operations that task performs. For example if you have a complex job, you can wrap its `perform` method with a tagged log to filter down to just logs written by that job.

```rb
class MyJob < ApplicationJob
  def perform
    Rails.logger.tagged("MyJob") do
      # ...
    end
  end
end
```

If you pass something that’s `.blank?` (like `nil`, `false`, or `""`) to `Rails.logger.tagged` it won’t add the tag. You can use this to add tags in certain conditions.

```rb
# config/initializers/suspicious_request.rb

class SuspiciousRequest
  def initialize(app)
    @app = app
  end

  def call(env)
    Rails.logger.tagged(tag) do
      @app.call(env)
    end
  end

  private

  def tag = suspicious? ? "Suspicious" : nil

  def suspicious? = true # some real implementation, hopefully 😅
end

# also in config/initializers/suspicious_request.rb
Rails.application.config.middleware.use(SuspiciousRequest)
```

Calls to `Rails.logger.tagged` can be nested. This appends additional tags after the existing ones. So add as many levels of context as you like!

```
Rails.logger.tagged("first") do
  Rails.logger.tagged("second") do
    Rails.logger.info("wow!")
  end
end

# => [first] [second] wow!
```